---
icon: material/text-box-outline
---

# BONUS! Fishing Mastery

**Difficulty**: :material-pine-tree-variant::material-pine-tree-variant-outline::material-pine-tree-variant-outline::material-pine-tree-variant-outline::material-pine-tree-variant-outline:<br/>

## Objective

!!! question "Request"
    Catch at least one of each species of fish that live around Geese islands. When you're done, report your findings to Poinsettia McMittens.

??? quote "Poinsettia McMittens"
    Excuse me, but you're interrupting my fishing serenity. Oh, you'd like to know how to become as good at fishing as I am?<br/>
    Well, first of all, thank you for noticing my flair for fishing. It's not just about looking good beside the lake, you know.<br/>
    The key is in the details, much like crafting the perfect toy. Observe the water, the weather, and the fish's habits - it's a science and an art.<br/>
    Of course, it helps to have a natural charm. Fish seem to find me irresistible. Must be my sparkling personality... or maybe it's just the glitter of my allure.<br/>
    Oh, the mysteries of the aquatic life around these islands are as elusive as, well, a clever compliment. But you'll get one if you probe enough.<br/>
    Remember, patience is more than a virtue in fishing; it's a strategy. Like waiting for the right time to use flattery, you wait for the right moment to strike.<br/>
    Go see if you can catch, say, 20 different types of fish!

## Hints

??? tip "Fishing Machine"
    There are a variety of strategies for automating repetative website tasks. Tools such as [AutoKey](https://github.com/autokey/autokey) and [AutoIt](https://www.autoitscript.com/site/) allow you to programmatically examine elements on the screen and emulate user inputs.

??? tip "I Am Become Data"
    One approach to automating web tasks entails the browser's developer console. Browsers' console allow us to manipulate objects, inspect code, and even interact with [websockets](https://javascript.info/websocket).

??? tip "Become the Fish"
    Perhaps there are some clues about the local aquatic life located in the HTML source code.

## Solution



## Response

!!! quote "Poinsettia McMittens"
    Hoy small fry, nice work!<br/>
    Now, just imagine if we had an automatic fish catcher? It would be as ingenious as me on a good day!<br/>
    I came across this [fascinating article](https://www.redhat.com/sysadmin/getting-started-socat) about such a device in a magazine during one of my more glamorous fishing sessions.<br/>
    If only I could get my hands on it, I'd be the undisputed queen of catching them all!
